WI #314: `SKU ID`, `SKU Price ID` and `SKU Price Details` clarification (#676)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/columns/skupriceid.md

# SKU Price ID

> A SKU Price ID is a unique identifier that defines the unit price used to calculate the charge. It can serve as a key reference to a [*price list*](#glossary:price-list) published by a provider, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information, including the associated list unit prices and pricing properties. Although the composition of properties associated with the SKU Price ID may differ across providers, the SKU Price ID is designed to represent the core, stable properties of a [*SKU Price*](#glossary:sku-price), excluding dynamic or negotiable properties such as unit price amount, currency (and related exchange rates), temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements (e.g., contract or account identifiers, and negotiable discounts). This ensures that the SKU Price ID remains consistent across different pricing scenarios, even though variable aspects (e.g., unit price, currency, effective dates) might fluctuate, facilitating the filtering of charges with the same stable SKU Price properties and allowing for tracking price fluctuations (e.g., changes in unit price amount) over time — for both list and contracted unit prices. The SKU Price ID is also commonly used to analyze costs based on pricing properties such as terms and tiers.

Author: I prefer this:

> A SKU Price ID is a provider-specified unique identifier that represents the core, stable properties of a [*SKU Price*](#glossary:sku-price), excluding fluctuations in dynamic or negotiable properties such as unit price amount, currency, temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements.

over this:

> A SKU Price ID is a unique identifier that defines the unit price used to calculate the charge.

If we proceed in this direction, I’ll need to adjust the rest accordingly, including the normative requirements. 
Additionally, we must not forget to update the glossary.

Reviewer: Like this a lot!!

I would note that we should leave room for providers to give customer-specific SKU Price details like negotiation-specific elements like a contracted unit price. We want the ID to still point to list unit price (as of a period of time) but additional details like contracted is a net positive and enables more accurate analysis.

GCP for example has monthly pricing sheets.. so we are saying that's ok, its external to this.. but the ID should remain the same so users can do their analysis over time even though the ID may be looked up in different places. Seems like a good middle ground to me! Nice work on this!

The SkuPriceId column adheres to the following requirements:

* SkuPriceId MUST be present in a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider publishes a SKU price list and MUST be of type String.

> * SkuPriceId MUST define a single unit price used for calculating the charge, reflecting a stable grouping of core properties of a SKU Price while excluding fluctuations in dynamic or negotiable properties such as unit price amount, currency, temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements.

Author: What about this:

> * SkuPriceId MUST NOT reflect (or be influenced/affected by) dynamic or negotiable properties such as unit price amount, currency, temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements (e.g., billing account).

> * SkuPriceId MUST define a single unit price used for calculating the charge, reflecting a stable grouping of core properties of a SKU Price while excluding fluctuations in dynamic or negotiable properties such as unit price amount, currency, temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements.

Author: The normative requirements discussed here, including both the original and updated versions, are not present in the latest suggested version. Therefore, I'm resolving this conversation.

* [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) MUST be associated with the SkuPriceId in the provider published price list but is not inherently part of the SkuPriceId itself.
* SkuPriceId MUST NOT be null when [ChargeClass](#chargeclass) is not "Correction" and [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is "Usage" or "Purchase", MUST be null when ChargeCategory is "Tax", and MAY be null for all other combinations of ChargeClass and ChargeCategory.

> * A given value of SkuPriceId MUST be associated with one and only one [SkuId](#skuid), except in cases of [commitment discount flexibility](#glossary:commitment-discount-flexibility).

Author: The exception **"except in cases of commitment discount flexibility"** seems inaccurate. I believe that **SkuPriceId MUST be associated with one and only one SkuId, without exceptions.**  

Based on the discussion and sample data provided as part of **#534**, even in cases of **size flexibility with spend-based commitment discounts,** the relationship between **SkuPriceId and SkuId** remains **one-to-one**, right?

* **Commitment Purchase record**: SkuId, SkuPriceId, SkuDetails, and all unit prices reflect the purchased resource's SKU/SKU Price properties and unit price amounts.  
* **Unused Usage record**: SkuId, SkuPriceId, SkuDetails, and all unit prices still reflect the purchased resource's SKU/SKU Price properties and unit price amounts.  
* **Regular Committed Usage record (where size flexibility applies)**: SkuId, SkuPriceId, SkuDetails, ListUnitPrice, and ContractedUnitPrice reflect the running resource’s SKU/SKU Price properties and unit price amounts. However, **CommitmentDiscountUnitPrice reflects the purchased resource's unit price amount.**  

The **size flexibility-related exception** applies to the **CommitmentDiscountUnitPrice - SkuPriceId** relationship, rather than the SkuPriceId - SkuId relationship. If needed, this should be addressed in one of the **CommitmentDiscountUnitPrice normative requirements.

Author: - SKU ID to SKU Price ID relationship and commitment discount flexibility:
  - Based on arguments provided in [this conversation](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676#discussion_r1943580224) he group agreed that the SKU ID to SKU Price ID relationship should be specified as one-to-many. 
  - As outlined in [this comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676#issuecomment-2686183192), an analysis of various pricing data, cost and usage datasets did not reveal any exceptions, including scenarios involving commitment discount flexibility. Since we did not observe such cases in the data, we decided not to explicitly call out this exception.

- SKU Price ID, Price Sheets and List/Contracted Unit Prices
  - As agreed in the meeting, both unit prices are addressed in the normative requirements in the same manner.

---

resolving conversation.

# SKU Price ID

> SKU Price ID is a provider-specified unique identifier that represents a specific [*SKU Price*](#glossary:sku-price) associated with a [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) used or purchased. It serves as a key reference for a *SKU price* in a [*price list*](#glossary:price-list) published by a provider, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SKU Price ID is a provider-specified unique identifier that represents a specific [*SKU Price*](#glossary:sku-price) associated with a [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) used or purchased. It serves as a key reference for a *SKU Price* in a [*price list*](#glossary:price-list) published by a provider, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price*.
```

Author: good catch!

> The composition of properties associated with the SKU Price ID may differ across providers and across *SKUs* within the same provider. However, the exclusion of dynamic or negotiable pricing properties, such as unit price amount, currency (and related exchange rates), temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements (e.g., contract or account identifiers, and negotiable discounts), ensures that the SKU Price ID remains consistent across different billing periods and billing accounts within a provider. This consistency enables efficient filtering of [*charges*](#glossary:charge) to track price fluctuations (e.g., changes in unit price amounts) over time and across billing accounts, for both list and contracted unit prices. Additionally, the SKU Price ID is commonly used to analyze costs based on pricing properties such as terms and tiers.

Author: This statement aligns better with SkuPriceDetails usage rather than SkuPriceId usage. It is already included in the SkuPriceDetails specification and I suggest removing it from the SkuPriceId specification.

```suggestion
The composition of properties associated with the SKU Price ID may differ across providers and across *SKUs* within the same provider. However, the exclusion of dynamic or negotiable pricing properties, such as unit price amount, currency (and related exchange rates), temporal validity (e.g., effective dates), and contract- or negotiation-specific elements (e.g., contract or account identifiers, and negotiable discounts), ensures that the SKU Price ID remains consistent across different billing periods and billing accounts within a provider. This consistency enables efficient filtering of [*charges*](#glossary:charge) to track price fluctuations (e.g., changes in unit price amounts) over time and across billing accounts, for both list and contracted unit prices.
```

Reviewer 3: Given it's an example, I'm fine with or without it. But I do think it's valid as is.

Author: keeping in both columns and resolving conversation.

The SkuPriceId column adheres to the following requirements:

* SkuPriceId MUST be present in a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports unit pricing concepts and publishes *price lists*, publicly or as part of contracting.
* SkuPriceId MUST be of type String.
* SkuPriceId MUST conform to [String Handling](#stringhandling) requirements.
* SkuPriceId nullability is defined as follows:
  * SkuPriceId MUST be null when [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is "Tax".
  * SkuPriceId MUST NOT be null when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase" and [ChargeClass](#chargeclass) is not "Correction".
  * SkuPriceId MAY be null in all other cases.
* When SkuPriceId is not null, SkuPriceId adheres to the following additional requirements:

>   * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid).

Reviewer 4: This is my only objection to this pr.  As written, this line is vague and contradicts existing patterns in CSP's and SaaS providers.

```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid) except in specific cases where a provider's pricing model allow a SkuPriceId to be matched with various [SkuIds](#skuid)
```

Reviewer 4: <img width="1419" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf5d8bc9-f5b8-411a-8a44-337be587712c" />

Here is an example of an RDS size-flex RIFee and 3 DiscountedUsage rows.  As commitment discount flexibility is applied, the `product_sku` is changing as different sized resources are covered (see first 3 rows) and this is different than the recurring purchase's (RIFee) SKU.

The SKUPriceID (last code in the `product_rate_code`) is across replicating across different SkuID's in the CUR and AWS' pricing list in a 1:many relationship.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39087351-44ee-4bb0-b023-e39f889591af)

The `product_sku` values for the first 3 rows in the first screenshot map to:

1. `ERYFWQCMHX7BMSMB ` - `db.r6g.8xlarge`
<img width="963" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/095faec3-34fc-41f2-8e17-bb4edca323d2" />

2. `WDMX5Q8QQY564QAJ` - `db.r6g.4xlarge`
<img width="951" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7afca8e7-8992-445e-a3a6-eebd72d957a5" />

3. `JKW33NST7MYN6F2F` - `db.r6g.12xlarge`
<img width="617" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4828a60e-bc7d-42e1-8ecd-490c52511aa1" />

Author: @cnharris10 
I assume the main reason for your concern is the **commitment-flexibility use case scenario** and how AWS provides data in the CUR for that use case.

**I don't see any PROs in having the SkuPriceId of the applied RI in the Committed Usage record**, except for the fact that it's what the provider does today and wouldn’t need to change anything.

On the other hand, here are a couple of CONs, i.e., reasons **why I believe we MUST NOT allow that exception** in the case of commitment discount flexibility:

- SkuId, SkuPriceId, SkuPriceDetails, etc., should provide information about the SKU / SKU Price associated to the **the running resource or service**, NOT about the **Reserved Instance (RI)** being applied to **reduce the rate**. 
  - This aligns with the agreement we reached when discussing Commitment Discount Flexibility in #534. (see [sample data](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1AYDPZ4rl90PPEbyQJUaGCUSwZ4s_sfy-8sO2KyNq0aM/edit?pli=1&gid=1712247049#gid=1712247049))

- Additionally, SkuPriceId MUST serve as a key reference for a *SKU price* in a public/contracted *price list*, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [List|Contracted]UnitPrice used to calculate the *charge*. 
  - If the SkuPriceId points to the SKU Price (i.e., the ListUnitPrice and ContractedUnitPrice) of the RI applied to the charge, it would prevent the ability to **verify unit prices for that charge record**.
 
- If needed, **the SKU Price ID of the applied RI** (along with all related details and unit prices) **can be resolved** by joining the Committed Usage record with the corresponding RI Purchase record, using the CommitmentDiscountId in the Commited Usage record and the ResourceId in the RI Purchase record.

---

**Questions:**

- What are the PROs of having the SkuPriceId of the applied RI in the Committed Usage record?
- How can we verify unit prices - how can we compare what's provided in the FOCUS dataset with the price sheets if the SkuPriceId column reflects the SKU Price ID associated with the RI rather than running resource?

Author: @aws-letianfeng hi!

Given that we are analyzing how AWS provides the `product_code` and `pricing_rate_code` in the CUR file for Usage-based commitments (RIs) combined with **commitment discount flexibility**, we would appreciate hearing your thoughts on this as well.

In [one of the comments above](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676#discussion_r2010968219), @cnharris10 provided a small subset of AWS CUR data outlining the commitment discount flexibility use case - an RI Purchase and a couple of Usage records with an applied RI and commitment discount flexibility in place.

If AWS maps the `product_code` to FOCUS `SkuId` and the `pricing_rate_code` to FOCUS `SkuPriceId` in the same way they provide it in CUR files, it follows that in the case of a Usage record with an applied RI and commitment discount flexibility in place, the SkuPriceId wouldn't reflect the `SkuPriceId` of the **running resource** but rather the `SkuPriceId` of the **applied RI**.

In the [previous comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676#discussion_r2011036892), I outlined why I believe this is problematic.

Please share your thoughts on this - specifically, whether AWS would have any objections to us specifying that for all Usage charge records, both the **SkuId and SkuPriceId (in fact, all SKU-related columns) MUST be associated with the running resource**, and that for every charge record, **without exception**, the following should apply:

> * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent SkuId.

Thanks!

Reviewer 5: I'd like to provide a perspective here.

> The SKUPriceID (last segment in the product_rate_code)

When I was a vendor, we did not treat just the last segment of the AWS `rateCode` as the SkuPriceId; it was all three segments together.  The three segments represent (in my own personal terms): SKU (i.e. the product), Term (e.g., On Demand, Reservation, Savings Plan), and Tier (e.g., 0 to infinity; 0 to 10k; 10k to 20k).

So, taking one of the examples above:

* SkuId: `WDMX5Q8QQY564QAJ`
* SkuTermId (not defined in FOCUS today): `WDMX5Q8QQY564QAJ.JRTCKXETXF`
* SkuPriceId: `WDMX5Q8QQY564QAJ.JRTCKXETXF.6YS6EN2CT7`

Here is a slide I assembled awhile back to explain the segments in that identifier:

<img width="1565" alt="Screenshot 2025-03-25 at 9 46 19 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ce173c19-903c-44d1-ac60-0d9d469de4a3" />

My point is this: **the AWS SkuPriceId does not repeat across SKUs**.  The _last segment of the SkuPriceId repeats_, certainly, but _not the entire ID_.  Thus, I do not believe we need to retain a carveout for "instances of commitment discount flexibility" because I believe there is no SkuPriceId repetition even in those circumstances.

I would invite pushback on that perspective.

Author: ### Commitment Discount Flexibility use case

Note: SkuPriceId, among other things, MUST enable lookup of details about the SKU, SKU Price, and corresponding unit prices in the price sheets.

#### Option A: SKU Price ID reflects SKU Price of the applied RI

- How can you look up and verify the unit price provided in a Committed Usage record?
  If SkuPriceId reflects the SKU Price of the applied RI, **as far as I know, that's not possible**!

#### Option B: SKU Price ID reflects SKU Price of the running resource

- How can you look up and verify the unit price provided in a Committed Usage record?
  If the SkuPriceId always reflects the SKU Price of the running resource you use that SkuPriceId to lookup and verify unit prices.

- How can you look up the unit prices associated with the applied RI? 
  You can resolve SkuPriceId associated with that RI via CommitmentDiscountId usng the query below and use the resolved purchase.SkuPriceId as a reference to SKU Price associated to the applied RI.

``` sql
SELECT usage.*, purchase.*
FROM focus_sandbox usage
     LEFT JOIN focus_sandbox purchase 
         ON usage.CommitmentDiscountId = purchase.ResourceId 
               AND purchase.ChargeCategory = 'Purchase'
WHERE usage.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
  AND usage.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL;
```

---

I hope I managed to explain why I find

- **option A problematic**, 
- **option B preferred**, 
- and why I believe that, especially in this case, FOCUS should not attempt to accommodate what providers do today but rather **specify what is expected to ensure that key features are supported** and supported consistently (e.g., price verification) .

Reviewer 4: I agree with you, the SKU should represent the running resource even when the running resource transforms away from the resource initially committed (i.e. m5.2xl RI fulfilled by 1/2 of an m5.4xl).  

But this needs to be clarified, and just saying that `SkuPriceId` has one parent `SkuId` isn't clear in this situation.

From the AWS perspective, if the parent is being referred to as the first segment of the `pricing/RateCode` as:
- SkuID: *NY3Y6UWDSZMXVZ4E* ... (parent)
- SkuPriceID: *NY3Y6UWDSZMXVZ4E*.JRTCKXETXF.6YS6EN2CT7 ... (child)

then this is too ambiguous because there is a disparity between the SkuId (and thus SkuPriceId) that is *running* and the SkuId that is *charged*.

For example, with *TinyCloud* as an example, if a VM_SMALL was purchased and a VM_XLARGE consumed the commitment discount for 1 hour, then:

```
| Service | Sku Id    | Sku Price Id                            | Sku Price Unit Price | Normalization Factor |
|---------|-----------| ----------------------------------------|----------------------| ---------------------|
| Compute | VM_SMALL  | VM_SMALL_COMMITTED_HOUR                 | $0.50                | 1                    |
| Compute | VM_MEDIUM | VM_MEDIUM_COMMITTED_HOUR                | $1.00                | 2                    |
| Compute | VM_LARGE  | VM_LARGE_COMMITTED_HOUR                 | $1.50                | 3                    |
| Compute | VM_XLARGE | VM_XLARGE_COMMITTED_HOUR                | $2.00                | 4                    |
```

*Correct Representation* ✅ (from running resource perspective)
- PricingQuantity: 0.25, x_CommitmentDiscountUnitPrice: $4.00, SkuId: VM_XLARGE
*Incorrect Representation* ❌ (from CD perspective)
- PricingQuantity:1.00, x_CommitmentDiscountUnitPrice: $1.00, SkuId: VM_SMALL

This is what is not being clarified via the existing line around one parent ... is it from the running SKU or pricing perspective?  Hence, this is why I suggested below to all flexibility for the provider to choose:

```
SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid) except in specific cases where a provider's pricing model allow a SkuPriceId to be matched with various [SkuIds](#skuid).
```

If FOCUS wants to go even farther and say, "No, it always has to be the running SKU" (which I like too), then we need to saying something more clarified at least like below (or whatever gets the point across):

Column: `SkuId`
- SkuId MUST refer to the consuming resource or service.

Column: `SkuPriceId`
- `SkuPriceId` MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid) referring to the consuming resource or service.

Reviewer 6: > Column: SkuId
>
>SkuId MUST refer to the consuming resource or service.
>
>Column: SkuPriceId
>
>SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage->Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676/files#skuid) referring to the consuming resource or service.

@cnharris10 is it fair to say that if these two lines are added you are ok to proceed with the 1:1 mapping between SkuId and SkuPriceId? I agree these lines make it clearer that the SkuId is to the consumption resource and the PriceId is also paid to the consumption resource not a discounting construct.

Author: We already have this requirement for SkuPriceId, and I agree - we should add a similar one for SkuId.

> * SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given [ResourceId](#resourceid) or [ServiceName](#servicename) used or purchased.

---

When comparing the existing version and Mike's suggestion, I prefer the existing version for the following reasons:

- The term "consuming" may imply only usage.
- The existing version directly references the ResourceId and ServiceName columns, i.e., the resource ID and service name provided in the same charge record.
- The term "associated with" better reflects the many-to-many relationship between SkuPriceId and resources/services.

Reviewer 4: Would suggest removing "purchased" though because this is the confusing part. 

SkuId MUST be associated with a  consuming ResourceId or ServiceName

SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given ResourceId or ServiceName consumed

Author: Using slightly different verbiage, these two requirements were specified in 1.0-preview:

> * SkuId MUST NOT be null when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase" and [ChargeClass](#chargeclass) is not "Correction".
> * SkuPriceId MUST NOT be null when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase" and [ChargeClass](#chargeclass) is not "Correction".

Additionally, in **Discount Handling**, we've specified the following for **Commitment Purchase** records:

> * The CommitmentDiscountId and ResourceId MUST be set to the ID assigned to the *commitment discount*. ChargeCategory MUST be set to "Purchase" on rows that represent a purchase of a *commitment discount*.

---

@cnharris10 I hear you, but considering everything listed above, these requirements are **relevant for both usage and purchase records**. This ensures that unit prices provided in that RI purchase record can also be verified.

Based on that, could you please reconsider?

Reviewer 7: - SKUPriceId for AWS was definitely all 3 components the way we modeled it. That said, its up to the providers, it's their data but we should stick to the requirements that solve the FinOps use cases.
- These definitely need to represent the actual SKU you used or purchased, not the discount instrument (e.g., commitment)
- On the debate about ‘used or purchased’ vs ‘consumed’, I don't see an issue with either option. I would suggest keeping it used or purchased (which I believe we've used in PricingQuantity before) and it's clear that purchases have SKUs and SKU Price IDs as well.
- I would suggest we not refer to ResourceId and ServiceName and instead refer conceptually to *resource* or *service* since SkuId's and SkuPriceIds aren't associated with the actual resource ids (which can be changed or re-used etc.) and instead associated with the underlying concept of a resource or service (which we define in the glossary and reference everywhere)

Reviewer 4: I'm hearing inconsistent convictions across this thread. I'm hearing that SKU columns must refer to the consuming resource or service consistently because this is better for the practitioner, and I'm hearing that this should be open-ended for providers to be able to choose ... and in the case of CSP commitments, a rate code in FOCUS following the commitment discount instead of the running sku is possible.

Reviewer 3: Thinking about commitment discount flexibility definitely makes this more confusing. Including some notes as I think about how it should be. (I don't care how any providers do it today. I only care about how FOCUS is trying to define it for practitioners.)

**Costs**
| ResourceId | SkuSize | CDId | SkuId | SkuPriceId | PricingQuantity | SPDetails |
|-------------|----------|-------|----------|-----------|------------------|-----------|
| RI1             | Small     | RI1    | Small    | Small_RIP | 1                       | { CC:1 }
| RI2             | Large     | RI2    | Large   | Large_RIP | 1                       | { CC:4 }
| VM1          | Large      | RI1    | Large   | Large_RI   | 0.25                  | { CC:4 }
| VM1          | Large      |          | Large   | Large_OD | 0.75                  | { CC:4 }
| VM2          | Large      | RI2    | Large   | Large_RI   | 1                       | { CC:4 }

**Prices**
| SkuId | SkuPriceId | LUP | CUP  | x_EUP |
|--------|------------|------|-------|--------|
| Small  | Small_RI   | 0.25 | 0.225 | 0.125 |
| Large  | Large_RI   | 1.00 | 0.90   | 0.50   |
| Large  | Large_RI   | 1.00 | 0.90   | 0.50   |
| Large  | Large_OD | 1.00 | 0.90   | 0.90   |

Reviewer 3: Reading thru the thread, it seems clear that SkuPriceId does still need to map back to a single SkuId, so I don't think we can take the original suggestion.

And given we already have prior art with the use of "resource or service used or purchased", I think it's too late in the game to try and change that. Or maybe we can revisit that everywhere during the consistency review.

Based on all this, it seems to me that we should close this thread. If we don't have agreement, then I would recommend reverting back to what the previous phrasing was, even tho we know it's not correct:
```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid), except in cases of [commitment discount flexibility](#glossary:commitment-discount-flexibility).
```

Author: **Current status:**

---

> * _SkuId MUST be associated with a given [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) used or purchased._

The above requirement is broken into two - one addressing Usage records and the other addressing Purchase records.

> * _SkuId MUST be associated with a given [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) consumed when ChargeCategory is "Usage"._
> * _SkuId MUST be associated with a given *resource* or *service* purchased when ChargeCategory is "Purchase"._

---

> * _SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given a given [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) used or purchased._

The above requirement is broken into two - one addressing Usage records and the other addressing Purchase records.

> * _SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) consumed when ChargeCategory is "Usage"._
> * _SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given *resource* or *service* purchased when ChargeCategory is "Purchase"._

---

@cnharris10 does this provide the required clarity? 

- The requirements related to Usage records align with your suggestions (which should clarify expectations for Committed Usage records with commitment discount flexibility as well), 
- And we have also included a requirement covering Purchase records (e.g., RI Purchase).

If you still believe that providers may find the expectations unclear, we can revert the disputed requirement to the version we had in FOCUS 1.1, i.e., add commitment discount flexibility case as an exception and revisit in future.

Thanks!

Reviewer 5: Per discussion in Mar 27 Members: could we go with a single line for each instead of two for each, like:

>  * SkuId MUST be associated with a given resource or service when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase".
>  * SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given resource or service when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase".

Reviewer 4: > Per discussion in Mar 27 Members: could we go with a single line for each instead of two for each, like:
> 
> > * SkuId MUST be associated with a given resource or service when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase".
> > * SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given resource or service when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase".

I am good with ^^ suggestion.  Let's close this thread, and get this through.

Author: suggested update applied. 
resolving this conversation

>   * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid), except in cases of [commitment discount flexibility](#glossary:commitment-discount-flexibility).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid), except in cases of [commitment discount flexibility](#glossary:commitment-discount-flexibility) or provider-specific pricing models incorporation additional flexibility.
```

As written, Datadog will definitely break this normative requirement for logs-based products as customers can switch from various timespans (3-day, 7-day, 15-day, etc.) across multiple SKUs within the billing period

Reviewer 4: It is exactly the same case as commitment flexibility. A customer will sign up with logs-indexed-15-day and can switch to logs-indexed-30-days within the contract term. In this case, their contract does not change but a normalization factor applies to allow them half as much usage for the same price. In this case the sku price for logs-indexed-30-day applies to logs-indexed-15-day

Reviewer 7: Seems to me like different SKUs. It's like going into Walmart and buying a 10-pack of pencils vs the 3-pack of pencils. It's a different thing and they would be charged for the period they used each SKU? Not sure what this has to do with contract terms or commitment normalizations etc.

Author: Based on the cost and usage datasets I have access to, providers that support concepts similar to SkuId and SkuPriceId associate each SkuPriceId with one and only one SkuId (In the case of AWS, the rateCode, which is mapped to the FOCUS SkuPriceId, even starts with the SkuId). 

This many-to-one relationship between SkuPriceId and SkuId is also confirmed by [the hypothetical dataset](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1AYDPZ4rl90PPEbyQJUaGCUSwZ4s_sfy-8sO2KyNq0aM/edit?pli=1&gid=1712247049#gid=1712247049) used as a basis for discussion in PR https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/534, as well as in the [FOCUS Sandbox](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS-Sample-Data).

For example, running this query, I wasn't able to find any SkuPriceId that has more than one ParentSkuId.

```sql
SELECT ProviderName, ChargeCategory, CommitmentDiscountCategory, CommitmentDiscountType, SkuPriceId, COUNT(DISTINCT SkuId) AS ParentSkuIdCount
FROM focus_sandbox_10
WHERE SkuPriceId IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY ProviderName, ChargeCategory, CommitmentDiscountCategory, CommitmentDiscountType, SkuPriceId
;
```

Reviewer 4: It's not a different SKU because the contracted SKU, rate, and potential usage commitment remains what the customer agreed to upfront even if their retention preference changes over the term. I will need to object to this change as it is written today.

Reviewer 3: @cnharris10 Is the price different? If so, then that sounds like a different SkuPriceId.

To visualize it, here's how I interpret what you're saying:

- Standard Log Management Indexing (SkuId: 123)
  - Standard Log Management Indexing with 3-Day Retention (SkuPriceId: 123-03) @ 1.06/1M events
  - Standard Log Management Indexing with 7-Day Retention (SkuPriceId: 123-07) @ 1.27/1M events
  - Standard Log Management Indexing with 15-Day Retention (SkuPriceId: 123-15) @ 1.70/1M events
  - Standard Log Management Indexing with 30-Day Retention (SkuPriceId: 123-30) @ 2.50/1M events

In this case, standard indexing always has the same SkuId, but the SkuPriceId changes since the prices all change.

Reviewer 4: From a marketing perspective, this is correct, and it is very similar to how EC2 acts:
- Elastic Compute Service
    - m5.small
    - m5.medium
    - ...
    - r5.small
    - r5.medium
    - ...

Under the hood though and as similar to EC2, each seemingly SKU Price above is actually the SKU ID with various SKU Prices connected across various offerings.  Additionally, an unlike with this logs example, but In most cases for Datadog, there are usually both a standard, on-demand monthly and annual rates.

```
- Standard Log Management (ServiceName)
     - logs-ingested (SKU ID)
         - Monthly
             - On-Demand Price (SKU Price ID)
             - Undisclosed Committed Rate #1 (SKU Price ID)
             - ...
     - logs-indexed-3-day (SKU ID)
         - Monthly
             - On-Demand Price (SKU Price ID)
             - Undisclosed Committed Rate #1 (SKU Price ID)
             - ...
    - logs-indexed-7-day (SKU ID)
        - Monthly
             - On-Demand Price (SKU Price ID)
             - Undisclosed Committed Rate #1 (SKU Price ID)
             - ...
    ....
```

A customer can negotiate for one of the undisclosed, standard, discounted rates that is tied to each one of the SKU's (let's say `logs-indexed-7-day`) above and any committed usage is drawn down accordingly over the billing period (month) even if the customer changes retentions ad-hoc (i.e. `logs-indexed-7-day` -> `logs-indexed-15-day`).  Any changes still keep the customer contracted with the original SKU (i.e.`logs-indexed-7-day`) amortizing against different rates connected to similar SKU's (i.e. `logs-indexed-15-day`).

Does this help?

Author: Closing this in favor of a [more recent discussion](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676/files#r2010968219) on the same topic. 

@cnharris10, feel free to reopen if needed.

  * SkuPriceId MUST remain consistent over time.

>   * SkuPriceId MUST remain consistent across billing accounts within a provider.

Author: ```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST remain consistent across contracts and billing accounts within a provider.
```

Author: Committing in agreement with @flanakin

  * SkuPriceId MAY equal SkuId.

>   * SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given [ResourceId](#resourceid) or [ServiceName](#servicename) used or purchased.

Reviewer 4: And a purchase too ...

The following block demonstrates that the "SKU" is composite including the purchase SKU (`BCRM4X3Z935FE9QD`) and the resource SKU (`24EGBYAZB5NV9PSA`) that together produces the SKUPriceID of:
```
"discountedRate" : {
  "price" : "5.09715",
  "currency" : "USD"
},
```

<img width="673" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aeb0c1f6-1750-432a-b3cb-e0fff9b36a1c" />

Reviewer 3: @cnharris10 Resolving this since it seems like it's covered already. Feel free to unresolve if you feel anything is missing. Maybe leave a suggestion so we know what part should change.

>   * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a key reference for a *SKU price* in a public *price list*, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.
>   * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a key reference for a *SKU price* in a contracted *price list*, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST serve as the reference for a *SKU price* in a provider-published *price list*, allowing detailed information to be looked up about the *SKU Price*. 
  * The [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) used to calculate the *charge* MUST be referenceable in the *price list*.
  * The [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) used to calculate the *charge* SHOULD be referenceable in the *price list*.
```

Author: Resolving in favor of [a more recent conversation on the same topic](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676/files/5944af37631c279af8dcf54825778999b0816484#r2010993823) (which includes a suggested quote).

>   * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a key reference for a *SKU price* in a public *price list*, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.
>   * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a key reference for a *SKU price* in a contracted *price list*, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.

Author: @udam-f2 what about this:

```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a reference for a *SKU price* in a public *price list* when the provider publishes unit prices exclusive of discounts, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.
  * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a reference for a *SKU price* in a contracted *price list* when the provider supports negotiated pricing concepts, allowing practitioners to look up detailed information about the *SKU Price* and the corresponding [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.
```

Message-wise, I believe the key difference between the original and your suggestion is the use of MUST vs. SHOULD for ContractedUnitPrice.

I agree that the version you suggested is more concise, and I’m open to suggestions on the verbiage. However, there are a couple of points I’d like to ensure are communicated with these requirements:

- I’d really like to ensure that the SkuPriceId enables looking up both the ContractedUnitPrice (when the provider supports negotiated discounts) and the ListUnitPrice (when the provider publishes unit prices exclusive of discounts). Some providers may not conform to this, but that’s okay. In this suggestion, I’ve included these conditions to bring it closer to what you were aiming for with SHOULD. 

- Unit prices are not reflected in the SkuPriceId (as they are not part of the SKU Price), which is why I used the phrasing “look up detailed information about the SKU Price and the corresponding unit prices” instead of “look up detailed information about the unit prices.”

Lastly, a comment on your suggestion: Each normative guideline should focus on the column for which we are listing the requirements. In your suggestion, the last two requirements pertain to the ListUnitPrice and ContractedUnitPrice, not the SkuPriceId.

Reviewer 7: Re: Contracted: 

I think publishing Contracted unit prices broadly can be problematic because some providers want to keep these private per legal contract terms (even pushing for those columns to be hidden within tools made available to a broader user base within the customer). While I support your intention here to make unit prices more accessible, I don't see how we can push for this change. That said, as always, if the broader group wants this change, I'm good to go with the group's recommendation.

> Unit prices are not reflected in the SkuPriceId (as they are not part of the SKU Price), which is why I used the phrasing “look up detailed information about the SKU Price and the corresponding unit prices” instead of “look up detailed information about the unit prices.”

in my version we have one normative statement saying this key allows us to look up detailed info, then two more normative statements that say it allows unit price lookups. Should be equivalent

Other updates:

The other update I've made is to remove the word 'public' from the requirement. I know we've talked about this many times so I assume this is an oversight. Pricing lists don't have to be publicly published. Many vendors may only publish the price lists in private.

I've made a few minor adjustments to my suggestion if its still useful.

Author: New suggestion:

- Using "price list" instead of "public/custom price list" (good call).
- Each requirement in a bullet (similar to your suggestion), whereby for each **unit price**, it's a **conditional MUST** (with the same condition we specified for the column presence).
- My thinking regarding ContractedUnitPrice: 
  - We've already specified that it MUST be present in a FOCUS dataset when the provider supports negotiated pricing. If present, the provider must enable lookup using SkuPriceId so that consumers can verify the price. 
  - Security? Exposing it only to authorized users is the consumer's responsibility. Authorized users should be able to see it in the FOCUS dataset, have access to the contracted price sheet, and verify it using SkuPriceId.

>   * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a reference for a *SKU price* in a provider-published *price list*, allowing lookup of detailed information about the *SKU Price*.
>   * SkuPriceId MUST enable lookup of the given [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) in a provider-published *price list* when the provider publishes unit prices exclusive of discounts.
>   * SkuPriceId MUST enable lookup of the given [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) in a provider-published *price list* when the provider supports negotiated pricing concepts.

Author: use the term provider-supplied

Author: Further discussion with @UdamDewaraja led me to realize that verifying the ContractedUnitPrice doesn't necessarily involve looking it up, therefore rephrasing this requirement 

> * SkuPriceId MUST enable lookup of the given ContractedUnitPrice in a provider-supplied price list when the provider supports negotiated pricing concepts.

to this

> * SkuPriceId MUST enable verification of the given ContractedUnitPrice when the provider supports negotiated pricing concepts.

Author: **Udam's suggestion, provided in [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/676/files/5944af37631c279af8dcf54825778999b0816484#r2009315287):**

> * SkuPriceId MUST serve as the reference for a *SKU price* in a provider-published *price list*, allowing detailed information to be looked up about the *SKU Price*. 
> * The SkuPriceId when referenced in the *price list* MUST allow looking up the [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.
> * The SkuPriceId when referenced in the *price list* SHOULD allow looking up the [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) used to calculate the *charge*.

---

**Currently in the PR:**

> * SkuPriceId MUST serve as a reference for a *SKU price* in a provider-supplied *price list*, allowing lookup of detailed information about the *SKU Price*.
> * SkuPriceId MUST enable verification of the given [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) when the provider publishes unit prices exclusive of discounts.
> * SkuPriceId MUST enable verification of the given [ContractedUnitPrice](#contractedunitprice) when the provider supports negotiated pricing concepts.

---

**SUMMARY**

- **Price Sheet, lookup and unit price verification:** Although it was not emphasized in the original requirement, during our discussion, we realized that it is preferable to avoid using the term "price sheet," especially when referring to ContractedUnitPrice, and instead focus on unit price verification.

- **SHOULD vs. MUST in the case of ContractedUnitPrice:** I believe that at least someone within the Customer/Consumer organization should be **authorized to verify the contracted price**, and therefore, the **ContractedUnitPrice verification MUST be enabled** if the concep is supported (If negotiated discounts are not applicable, the ContractedUnitPrice defaults to the List price.) 
  If this is a show-stopper, I am open to changing it to SHOULD.

Author: suggestion accepted and the change applied

The SkuPriceId column adheres to the following requirements:

* SkuPriceId MUST be present in a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports unit pricing concepts and publishes *price lists*, publicly or as part of contracting.
* SkuPriceId MUST be of type String.
* SkuPriceId MUST conform to [String Handling](#stringhandling) requirements.
* SkuPriceId nullability is defined as follows:
  * SkuPriceId MUST be null when [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is "Tax".
  * SkuPriceId MUST NOT be null when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase" and [ChargeClass](#chargeclass) is not "Correction".
  * SkuPriceId MAY be null in all other cases.
* When SkuPriceId is not null, SkuPriceId adheres to the following additional requirements:
  * SkuPriceId MUST have one and only one parent [SkuId](#skuid).
  * SkuPriceId MUST remain consistent over time.
  * SkuPriceId MUST remain consistent across [*billing accounts*](#glossary:billing-account) or contracts.
  * SkuPriceId MAY equal SkuId.

>   * SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given [ResourceId](#resourceid) or [ServiceName](#servicename) used or purchased.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * SkuPriceId MUST be associated with a given [*resource*](#glossary:resource) or [*service*](#glossary:service) used or purchased.
```

Author: Yes, that's how I initially planned it - to reuse the existing verbiage (e.g., for PricingQuantity), but then I started (over-)refining it.
